96 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
effects such as these can translate into large practical effects—suc h as large dollars impacted or 
productive changes in performance (Harter et al., 2002; Steele et al., 2012). For example, in the 
study by Harter et al. (2002) discussed above, business units in the top quartile on employee 
engagement had, on average, from $80,000 to $120,000 higher monthly revenue or sales. 
Assuming even an $80,000 monthly difference per business unit, that translates into $960,000 
per year (Harter et al., 2002). The study by Walton (2009) noted above found a $3 – $5.3 milli on 
difference for business unites with higher work engagement. Similarly, Best Buy reported that 
stores in which employee engagement increased by even one tenth of a point (on a 5-point rating 
scale) had a sales increase of more than $100,000 for the year (BlessingsWhite, 2008). JCPenny 
reported that stores in the top quartile of employee engagement scores generate about 10% 
higher sales volume compared to similar-sized stores in the bottom quartile of engagement 
(BlessingsWhite, 2008). Rucci, Kim, and Quinn (1998) found that, at Sears, a 5-point higher 
level of employee attitudes translated to a 1.3-point improvement in customer satisfaction and 
0.5% increase in revenue growth.  
Finally, a significant number of the studies linking positive employee attitudes to 
financial results have been conducted by consulting groups, such as Gallup, Watson Wyatt, 
Hewitt Associates, and Towers Perrin. The reliability of such studies could be criticized as 
lacking the rigor of academic scrutiny. Nonetheless, many U.S. companies have found the 
evidence convincing: 80% of senior leaders believe employee engagement is critical to achieving 
their business objectives, and 92% of companies conduct an employee engagement survey 
(Johnson, 2013).  
Based on the above, the weight of the current evidence appears to favor a conclusion that 
positive workforces are more profitable than those that are disengaged or disinterested. 

97 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
Positive Workforces also Perform Better on Other Indicators of Business Success  
In addition to being more profitable, positive workforces perform better on other 
indicators of business effectiveness. Gallup (2013) has conducted extensive studies to evaluate 
whether employee engagement is linked to a variety of business outcomes. It has found that, 
compared with business units that score in the bottom quartile of employee engagement, top-
quartile units have the following: 37% lower absenteeism, 25% lower turnover (in high-turnover 
organizations), 65% lower turnover (in low-turnover organizations), 10% higher customer 
metrics, 21% higher productivity, and 22% higher profitability. The business units that scored in 
the top half of their organization in engagement had nearly double the odds of success on 
business outcomes when compared with those in the bottom half (Gallup, 2013).   
A study by Steele et al. (2012) of 724 workers in 56 U.S. restaurants showed that pos, 
work engagement, and vigor were statistically significant predictors of job performance, job 
satisfaction, customer service, and turnover intentions. Numerous other studies also show a 
positive relationship between job satisfaction or engagement on the one hand, and, on the other, 
job performance, client satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors. E.g., Bakker, 
Demerouti, & Verbeke (2004) (in a study of 146 employees in different sectors and jobs, finding 
that engaged employees received higher ratings from their colleagues on extra-role 
organizational citizenship behaviors); Bakker & Demerouti (2008) (reviewing studies showing 
positive link between engagement and job performance); Bateman & Organ (1983) (in a study of 
77 university employees, finding positive relationship between job satisfaction and 
organizational citizenship); Halbesleben & Wheeler (2008) (discussing studies linking job 
embeddedness and engagement to enhanced job performance and reduced turnover intention and 
conducting longitudinal study of 573 employees in a variety of jobs and industries that showed a 

98 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
correlation of .32 with employee engagement and supervisor-rated performance); Harter et al. 
(2002) (showing positive correlation between employee engagement-satisfaction and customer 
loyalty); Judge, Thorensen, Bono, & Patton (2001) (conducting a meta-analysis of 254 studies 
that encompassed 54,417 subjects and finding a correlation between overall job satisfaction and 
overall performance of .30; citing other research in which correlation between job satisfaction 
and citizenship behaviors was .28); Rich, Lepine, & Crawford (2010) (in study of 245 
firefighters, linking employee engagement to enhanced task performance and organizational 
citizenship as rated by supervisors); Salanova, Agut, & Peiro (2005) (in a study of restaurant 
workers and hotel receptionists, finding that employee engagement and organizational resources 
predicted service climate which, in turn, predicted employee performance and customer loyalty). 
Studies also reflect that positive affect (typically measured as positive mood or frequent 
positive emotions) plays a role in success at work. For example, the study by Lyubomirsky et al. 
(2005) was referenced above in the discussion of positive emotions. This was a meta-analysis 
involving 225 studies and 275,000 participants. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) found positive 
relationships between positive affect and a variety of positive work-life outcomes, including 
organizational citizenship behavior, job performance, and customer service. The studies also 
reflected negative relationships between positive affect and counterproductive work behavior, 
job withdrawal, turnover intentions, and absenteeism.  
Other studies have made similar findings. E.g., Lee & Allen (2002) (in a study of 149 
nurses, finding that employee’s work-related positive affect and cognitions about employer 
fairness positively correlated with colleague’s ratings of employee’s help provided to others and 
with citizenship directed at the organization); Borman, Penner, Allen, & Motowidlo (2001) 
(reviewing studies that show positive links between positive affect (mood) and citizenship 