99 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
behaviors and negative correlations between negative affect and citizenship behaviors); Deluga 
& Masson (2000) (reviewing studies showing positive relationship between positive affect and 
helping behaviors and finding, based on a study of 99 college Resident Assistants (“RAs” ), a 
positive association between positive affect and student-ratings of RA performance). 
Conversely, other evidence reflects that negative affect predicts poor job task 
performance and counterproductive work behavior—and it does so far better than either low  job 
satisfaction, engagement, or positive affect (Dalal et al., 2012). Similarly, in a study of 300 sales 
persons of a department store, George (1990) found that the negative affective tone of work 
groups was significantly and negatively associated with prosocial behavior. But positive 
affective tone was significantly and negatively correlated with absences (George, 1990). 
In sum, the growing evidence that positive workforces perform better and make 
companies more profitable provides a compelling reason for law firms to aspire to implement the 
positive law firm blueprint. 
Positive Law Firms Will be Recruiting Magnets for Millennials 
As noted in Part I, at least one critic blames Baby Boomers for making a mess of the 
legal profession by their devotion to short-term profits (Harper, 2013). While there surely is 
blame to go around, Baby Boomers are part of the story. Historically, Boomers have been 
characterized as being hypercompetitive, working long hours, and scoffing at work-life balance 
(Rikleen, 2014; Retzloff, 2010). Studies find them to be materialistic and focused on external 
rewards (Retzloff, 2010). The generational dynamics that shaped current law firm culture are 
likely to generate increasing tension as Millennials—the 86 million America ns born from 1980 
to 2000—continue to inundate firms and question prevailing values (Rikleen, 2014). The positive 
law firm blueprint better aligns with Millennial values and may provide a recruiting advantage to 