102 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
reinforcement or reprimands (Sujansky & Ferri-Reed, 2009; Espinoza, 2012). The most effective 
communications will be those that are positive and designed to set a tone of focus, enthusiasm, 
success, and fulfillment (Sujansky & Ferri-Reed, 2009; Espinoza, 2012). Millennials like to feel 
appreciated, valued, respected, and that they are making a real contribution (Sujansky & Ferri-
Reed, 2009). The common theme to the Millennial profile is that they respond best to employers 
that convey “you matter to us”; your well-being and enthusiasm are important to our  success 
(Sujansky & Ferri-Reed, 2009; Espinoza, 2012).  
Given the varying value sets of the three generations that will team up to determine law 
firms’ future success, firms will be best served by expanding their value system as outlined in the 
positive law firm blueprint. Positive law firm culture will be more positive, affirming, and 
connected to a higher purpose—a culture that will be particularly attractive  and motivating for 
Generation X and Millennials. It also may be that Boomers, as they approach retirement, are 
ready to embrace expanded values. Psychologists focusing on adult life stages note that extrinsic 
motivation for money and rewards levels off in mid-life, as a greater interest in self-identity and 
creating a legacy emerges (Retzloff, 2010). For all these reasons, now appears to be an ideal time 
for law firms to turn toward the positive. 
V. THE FUTURE 
Future Directions: Giving Life to the Positive Law Firm Blueprint 
The positive law firm blueprint is not simply a final project done to fulfill the 
requirement of a Master’s degree; it is the blueprint for my new vocation. I resigned from my 
BigLaw job so that I could focus on trying to make a difference in the quality of lawyers’ lives. 
My future work will focus on using the positive law firm blueprint, which consists mostly of 
theory, and devising ways to apply positive psychology concepts to elevate the legal profession. 