98 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
correlation of .32 with employee engagement and supervisor-rated performance); Harter et al. 
(2002) (showing positive correlation between employee engagement-satisfaction and customer 
loyalty); Judge, Thorensen, Bono, & Patton (2001) (conducting a meta-analysis of 254 studies 
that encompassed 54,417 subjects and finding a correlation between overall job satisfaction and 
overall performance of .30; citing other research in which correlation between job satisfaction 
and citizenship behaviors was .28); Rich, Lepine, & Crawford (2010) (in study of 245 
firefighters, linking employee engagement to enhanced task performance and organizational 
citizenship as rated by supervisors); Salanova, Agut, & Peiro (2005) (in a study of restaurant 
workers and hotel receptionists, finding that employee engagement and organizational resources 
predicted service climate which, in turn, predicted employee performance and customer loyalty). 
Studies also reflect that positive affect (typically measured as positive mood or frequent 
positive emotions) plays a role in success at work. For example, the study by Lyubomirsky et al. 
(2005) was referenced above in the discussion of positive emotions. This was a meta-analysis 
involving 225 studies and 275,000 participants. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) found positive 
relationships between positive affect and a variety of positive work-life outcomes, including 
organizational citizenship behavior, job performance, and customer service. The studies also 
reflected negative relationships between positive affect and counterproductive work behavior, 
job withdrawal, turnover intentions, and absenteeism.  
Other studies have made similar findings. E.g., Lee & Allen (2002) (in a study of 149 
nurses, finding that employee’s work-related positive affect and cognitions about employer 
fairness positively correlated with colleague’s ratings of employee’s help provided to others and 
with citizenship directed at the organization); Borman, Penner, Allen, & Motowidlo (2001) 
(reviewing studies that show positive links between positive affect (mood) and citizenship 

99 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
behaviors and negative correlations between negative affect and citizenship behaviors); Deluga 
& Masson (2000) (reviewing studies showing positive relationship between positive affect and 
helping behaviors and finding, based on a study of 99 college Resident Assistants (“RAs” ), a 
positive association between positive affect and student-ratings of RA performance). 
Conversely, other evidence reflects that negative affect predicts poor job task 
performance and counterproductive work behavior—and it does so far better than either low  job 
satisfaction, engagement, or positive affect (Dalal et al., 2012). Similarly, in a study of 300 sales 
persons of a department store, George (1990) found that the negative affective tone of work 
groups was significantly and negatively associated with prosocial behavior. But positive 
affective tone was significantly and negatively correlated with absences (George, 1990). 
In sum, the growing evidence that positive workforces perform better and make 
companies more profitable provides a compelling reason for law firms to aspire to implement the 
positive law firm blueprint. 
Positive Law Firms Will be Recruiting Magnets for Millennials 
As noted in Part I, at least one critic blames Baby Boomers for making a mess of the 
legal profession by their devotion to short-term profits (Harper, 2013). While there surely is 
blame to go around, Baby Boomers are part of the story. Historically, Boomers have been 
characterized as being hypercompetitive, working long hours, and scoffing at work-life balance 
(Rikleen, 2014; Retzloff, 2010). Studies find them to be materialistic and focused on external 
rewards (Retzloff, 2010). The generational dynamics that shaped current law firm culture are 
likely to generate increasing tension as Millennials—the 86 million America ns born from 1980 
to 2000—continue to inundate firms and question prevailing values (Rikleen, 2014). The positive 
law firm blueprint better aligns with Millennial values and may provide a recruiting advantage to 