98 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
correlation of .32 with employee engagement and supervisor-rated performance); Harter et al. 
(2002) (showing positive correlation between employee engagement-satisfaction and customer 
loyalty); Judge, Thorensen, Bono, & Patton (2001) (conducting a meta-analysis of 254 studies 
that encompassed 54,417 subjects and finding a correlation between overall job satisfaction and 
overall performance of .30; citing other research in which correlation between job satisfaction 
and citizenship behaviors was .28); Rich, Lepine, & Crawford (2010) (in study of 245 
firefighters, linking employee engagement to enhanced task performance and organizational 
citizenship as rated by supervisors); Salanova, Agut, & Peiro (2005) (in a study of restaurant 
workers and hotel receptionists, finding that employee engagement and organizational resources 
predicted service climate which, in turn, predicted employee performance and customer loyalty). 
Studies also reflect that positive affect (typically measured as positive mood or frequent 
positive emotions) plays a role in success at work. For example, the study by Lyubomirsky et al. 
(2005) was referenced above in the discussion of positive emotions. This was a meta-analysis 
involving 225 studies and 275,000 participants. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) found positive 
relationships between positive affect and a variety of positive work-life outcomes, including 
organizational citizenship behavior, job performance, and customer service. The studies also 
reflected negative relationships between positive affect and counterproductive work behavior, 
job withdrawal, turnover intentions, and absenteeism.  
Other studies have made similar findings. E.g., Lee & Allen (2002) (in a study of 149 
nurses, finding that employee’s work-related positive affect and cognitions about employer 
fairness positively correlated with colleague’s ratings of employee’s help provided to others and 
with citizenship directed at the organization); Borman, Penner, Allen, & Motowidlo (2001) 
(reviewing studies that show positive links between positive affect (mood) and citizenship 