90 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
Freeman et al.’s (2007) ethical leadership model as well as authentic, transformational leadership 
models (e.g. , Bass & Steidlmeier, 1999; Wang, Oh, Courtright, & Colbert, 2011). Ethical firm 
leaders will have, at a minimum, the following objectives: (1) releasing human potential of 
constituents, (2) balancing the needs of individuals, the firm, and the community, (3) defending 
the firm’s fundamental values, and (4) instilling in individuals a sense of initiative and 
responsibility (Freeman, et al., 2007). 
Positive Law Firms’ Measures of Success Will be Broader than Profitability  
A theme running throughout this paper is that, currently, law firm success is judged 
almost exclusively by financial measures. Positive law firms will create additional metrics to 
measure firm success, such as lawyer well-being. To advance this goal, I propose to create a law 
firm well-being index, which is discussed below in Part V. 
PART IV: THE BUSINESS CASE 
Positive Law Firms’ Competitive Advantages 
Aspiring positive law firms need not be motivated solely by an altruistic desire to provide 
fulfilling work lives for their lawyers—that goal is only one of MFS’s anim ating features. 
Especially in the current competitive environment, law firms are rightly concerned about 
financial viability. The discussion above of the positive law firm blueprint referenced research 
that links positive business practices to many desirable business outcomes such as, for example, 
job performance, client service, and retention. Below, I discuss those in more detail as well as 
other competitive advantages from which positive law firms may benefit: (1) increased 
profitability, (2) a variety of desirable business outcomes other than financial returns, and (3) 
successful recruiting and retention of the Millennial generation of lawyers, who are critical to 
firms’ future success. 

91 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
 
Positive Workforces Make Cents: Enhanced Profitability  
Law firms are highly protective of their lawyers’ time—each hour not billed t o a client 
represents dollars not earned for the firm. Before launching any new effort that will cost money 
and distract lawyers from client business, firms will ask for evidence that positive business 
practices enhance profitability. I already provided some such evidence above, which showed that 
MFS firms significantly outperformed GTG firms on financial measures (Sisodia et al., 2014). 
Below, I discuss more of the growing evidence that positive business practices contribute to 
financial performance. 
Cost of disengaged workforces.  Before reaching the evidence linking positive 
workforces to financial results, it is important to note the devastating financial impact of negative 
or disinterested workforces. A Gallup report of employee engagement found that, by the end of 
2012, only 30% of American workers were engaged in their workplace (Sorenson & Garman, 
2014). The Gallup results mean that 70% of workers are basically going through the motions at 
work and are not performing their best (Sorenson & Garman, 2014). The Gallup report also 
showed that, of the 70% who were not engaged, 18% were actively disengaged —which means 
that they were actively destructive toward the company. Gallup estimated that actively 
disengaged employees cost the U.S. $450 billion to $550 billion in lost productivity each year 
(Sorenson & Garman, 2014).   
Further, the Corporate Leadership Council (2004) found that employees with lower 
engagement are four times more likely to leave their jobs than those who are highly engaged. 
Turnover—including the costs of separation, vacancy, replacement, and training—can r ange 
from 30% to 200% of the lost employee’s salary (Wollard, 2011).  

92 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
Advantages of engaged workforces. On the other hand, a growing body of evidence 
shows that workforces with positive job attitudes and behaviors (e.g., job satisfaction, employee 
engagement) make more money for their employers. For example, Harter, Schmidt, and Hayes 
(2002) conducted a meta-analysis that involved a total of 7,939 business units in 36 companies 
and found that employee satisfaction and engagement have a positive association with increased 
business unit outcomes, including profit. They studied the correlation between employee 
satisfaction and engagement with five business unit performance measures. Of those five 
measures, employee satisfaction and engagement correlated most highly with customer 
satisfaction and loyalty (.32 and .33, respectively) and employee turnover (-.36 and -.30), 
followed by safety (-.20 and -.32), productivity (.20 and .25), and profitability (.15 and .17) 
(Harter et al., 2002).   
Another meta-analysis reflected a positive relationship with employee engagement and 
revenue (correlation of .24) (Harter, et. al, 2004). The relationship was even stronger for business 
units high in both employee and customer engagement (correlation of .32) (Harter, et. al, 2004).  
Koys (2001) conducted a two-year longitudinal study of 28 stores in a restaurant chain to 
evaluate whether human resource (“HR”) outcomes influenced organizational e ffectiveness. The 
HR outcomes studied were employee satisfaction, OCBs, and turn-over. The organizational 
effectiveness factors were customer satisfaction and profitability. The most significant 
correlations were found between employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction the following 
year (.62) and with organizational citizenship and store profitability (.41) the following year. 
There also was a positive correlation between a composite score for HR outcomes and 
organizational effectiveness (.35). The longitudinal design and data support that HR outcomes 
influence organizational effectiveness (and not the other way around) (Koys, 2001). 

93 
BUILDING THE POSITIVE LAW FIRM 
© 2014 Anne Brafford 
 
Another study analyzed 17 European-based manufacturing units of a global company to 
investigate the potential impact of business-unit employee engagement on organizational 
profitability (Walton, 2009). The study found a statistically significant positive relationship 
between business unit employee engagement and business unit organizational profit for each 
measurement year. (The correlation coefficients for 2005, 2006, and 2007 were, respectively, 
.491, .659, and .526.) The difference in organizational profitability based on higher and lower 
business unit employee engagement in the years 2005-2007 was between $3 million and $5.3 
million. This reflected a difference of 4.92% to 10.43% return-on-sales, in favor of business units 
with higher levels of employee engagement. 
A study conducted by Xanthopoulou, Bakker, Demerouti, and Schaufeli (2009) focused 
on the impact of day-level fluctuations in engagement. They conducted a study of 42 employees 
working in three branches of a fast food company to examine how daily fluctuations in their 
work environment impacted work engagement and financial returns. The study linked day-level 
supervisory coaching to work engagement, which, in turn, was related to day-level financial 
returns (Xanthopoulou et al., 2009). 
Schneider, Macey, Barbera, and Martin (2009) administered employee engagement 
measures to employees of 65 companies in manufacturing and service industries. They also 
obtained financial data, including profits as a percent of revenues. They found a statistically 
significant correlation (.35) between employee work engagement and profits. 
Gallup data also supports the conclusion that positive workforces are more profitable.  
Gallup has reported that companies with 9.3 engaged employees for every actively disengaged 
employee in 2010-2011 experienced 147% higher earnings per share (“EPS”) on average i n 
2011-2012 compared with their competition (Sorenson & Garman, 2014). Companies with a 