262
®l::'i1:u11{;.leiit:lis 
audience's mind is, "Do our leaders believe this and are they actually going to run the firm 
that way?" 
All too often, the audience is given no evidence of the firm's leadership commitment to the 
ideas, and the whole exercise becomes a waste of money and time. I have been told more 
times than I care to remember that the reaction to one of my presentations has been, 'This 
all makes terrific sense, but there's no way we'll ever do these things around here." 
If people are to make the right strategic decision in every location of the firm, in every op­
erating group and at every level, then they must absolutely trust that management wiU back 
them up and reward them (or at least not punish them) for acting in accordance with the 
declared strategy. A large part of really bringing about strategic change is designing some 
action or new system that visibly, inescapably and irreversibly commits top management to 
the strategy. 
I have sometimes asked firm leaders whether they are willing to announce to their people, 
right up front, that they will resign their roles if measurable progress is not made on the 
strategic plans they advocate. Such a commitment has had a dramatic impact where it has 
been made. 
4. Principles Are More Effective Than Tactics 
Since successful implementation of a strategy requires both sustained commitment over 
· time and broad participation across the whole organization, strategies in business, like 
diets and alcohol recovery, are implemented much better when the ideas are presented as 
matters of principle, not just as matters of expediency. 

263
@bange!Enis 
If strategic rules are justified only in terms of outcomes ("exercise daily in order to look 
good"), the diet will always be seen as a punishment on the way to an uncertain and pos­
sibly unattainable reward. Accordingly, it will always be resented. 
If, however, diet achieves the force of moral principle (such as "treating clients and employ­
ees with respect is a value around here, not just a tactic"), the odds are significantly higher 
that successful implementation will be achieved. 
As I reported in True Professionalism and Practice What You Preach, managers who get 
things done are people who are seen to have an ideology-their people believe that they 
believe in something. 
This is because buy-in and excellent implementation result from a sense of not wanting to 
let people down. My physical trainer reports that some of his clients tell him that they keep 
up their exercise programs between meetings because they "don't want to disappoint him." 
5. People Must Volunteer 
Even though it is the leader's job to offer an ideology around which people can rally, it is by 
itself only a necessary, but not sufficient, first step. 
Among the most powerful revelations of any successful recovery or self-improvement 
program, perhaps the most important is this: it only works when the individual is doing it 
for himself or herself and has made a personal choice to do it. 
It doesn't work if the person is doing it only for their spouse, or for his or her children, or 
to gain the good opinion of others. To sustain the effort, an individual has got to make a 
personal choice that the change is being made for him- or herself. 