266
Changeihis 
As all married couples who try dieting know, it's hard enough to stay the course and resist 
temptation when you are both attempting to do the right thing. It's nigh impossible if those 
around you continue to indulge and there are temptations (food, alcohol, etc.) all around. You 
either pull this off together, or you will lose the resolve and you will fail. 
Notice, it's absolutely not about how we can force people to do what we want. It's about how 
we can make sure that people have opted in and that those who do not wish to be on the 
program have opted out-of the firm! 
People absolutely need the mutual support (and social structure) that comes from doing this 
together, in common cause. People need to help each other through the tough times ("Come 
on, one last repetition of the training circuit") instead of being part of a forgiving culture that 
keeps discouraging extra effort. ("Oh, that's OK, you can skip exercise today. You deserve a 
break.") 
Again, that's why other researchers and I keep discovering that the most successful orga­
nizations have an ideology. There is a McKinsey way, a Goldman Sachs approach and a Bain 
philosophy, to take only three examples of firms with strong ideologies, clear strategies and 
the financial success to match. 
At these firms, if you don't subscribe to the ideology, you don't stay and argue or act as a 
silent dissenter. You walk. Or, eventually, you're asked to walk. 

267
~nangemnis 
Managing the Process of Change 
None of this is meant to say that firms must change overnight. It truly is, like alcoholic recov­
ery, a process of "first make a lifetime commitment, then take it one day at time." 
Once we know what the agreed-upon diet is, there is a need for skilled coaching in leading 
individuals and teams through the struggle to attain the goals they have committed to. 
I have described this process elsewhere: my article "A Great Coach in Action" and my book, 
First Among Equals, both explore this topic in depth. But it is worth reviewing the highlights 
of what we know about diet and exercise program management here. 
The key is to manage with a philosophy of "It's OK to stumble; it's only a sin if you don't get 
back on the program." The primary goal of the beginning stage of a change program is to get 
people to believe that it is doable and that all we are asking is that they try. This means early 
successes. 
All that wise leaders (and good trainers) talk about is the next small step. And they celebrate 
like crazy each small accomplishment. They focus on requiring improvement, not on requir­
ing excellence. "As long as you are improving, you're with the program, and one of us!" 
Managing a weight loss program often means you stop talking about the ultimate goal. If you 
keep reminding me that I need to lose 50 pounds, it is as likely to backfire and make me give 
up as it is to energize me. 
But what if someone says to me, "Let's just focus on losing one pound in a week, David. Do 
you think you can do that? That doesn't sound impossible, does it?" My reaction to that will 
be a lot different. Yet, of course, one pound a week is 50 pounds in a year. An alcoholic is 
daunted by a lifetime of abstinence, but he or she can manage to not drink just for today. 