254
Cha.ngeT'his 
Why We Don't Do It 
The primary reason we do not work at areas in which we know we need to improve is that the 
rewards (and pleasures) are in the future; the disruption, discomfort and discipline needed to 
get there are immediate. 
To reach our goals, we must first change our lifestyle, our daily habits, now. Then we have to 
have the courage to keep up the new habits and not yield to all the old familiar temptations. 
Then, and only then, we get the benefits. 
As human beings, we are not good at such decisions. We start self-improvement programs 
with good intentions, but if they don't pay off immediately, or if a temptation to depart from 
the program arises, we abandon our efforts completely-until the next time we pretend to be 
on the program. 
That's our pattern. Try a little, succumb to temptation, give up. Repeat until totally frustrated. 
Unfortunately, there is rarely, if ever, a benefit from dabbling or trying a little of a new 
strategy. 
You can't get half the benefits of a better marriage by cutting out half your affairs; you don't 
cure half the problems of alcoholism by cutting out half the drinks; and you don't much 
reduce the risks of lung cancer by cutting out half the cigarettes. 
So it is with business strategy: you can't achieve a competitive differentiation through things 
you do "reasonably well, most of the time." Not only can you not dabble, but you also cannot 
have short-term strategies (an oxymoron, if ever there was one). The pursuit of short-term 
goals is inherently anti-strategic and self-defeating. 

255
@namge:Ehis 
As Jean Nidetch (the founder of Weight Watchers) believed, the pursuit of quick weight loss 
is always self-defeating and ill-advised. If you don't understand from the beginning that you 
have to change your lifestyle, now and forever, then you are wasting your time. Any initial 
weight you lose will be put right back on. 
What's more, repeated, short-lived efforts at weight loss are actually detrimental to long-run 
success since, among other reasons, they breed cynicism and the attitude of "We can't do 
this. We've tried and failed before." 
Millions of people and countless businesses have proved her insight exactly correct. You are 
either seriously on the program, really living what you have chosen, or you are wasting your 
time. 
Strategy Is the Diet, Not the Goal 
Debating which goals to pursue (whether you wish to choose losing weight, giving up smok­
ing, ceasing to drink or starting to exercise) is a nonsensical process if you lack the discipline 
to stick with the (different) diet and exercise programs that each of these requires. The only 
meaningful debate is which diet you are really ready to get on. 
Giving up smoking may be better for you (or a better competitive strategy), but if you're 
not willing to make the changes that that specific goal requires, its relative importance is 
irrelevant. 
It's the same in business. Discussing "strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats" (to 
take only the oldest and most familiar of the strategic planning exercises) is fun, but gets 
nowhere near the real questions. 