260
@fflan~eiflis 
2. You Must Change the Core Scorecards 
Strategy, if is to be lived and achieved, is about modifying the very rules of daily living and 
scorekeeping. You must scheme carefully about how new tracking measures of the strate­
gies you pursue are published and disseminated. 
If you are trying to lose weight, you must get on the scale regularly. If you do not, it is too 
easy to let yourself go and fool yourself as to how you are doing. But if you are the only 
one to see what the measurement says, the force for change will be minimal. 
We all forgive ourselves too easily. We all find it quite easy to live with guilt. Even high lev­
els of guilt don't change people. Embarrassment, even in small doses, is far more effective. 
How much more forceful it would be if you let your spouse see, each time, what you weigh! 
Or better yet, what about letting your children monitor your progress? 
So it is in professional life. When I was a teacher at the Harvard Business School, every 
course taught there was evaluated by the students at the end of every semester, and the 
results were published to everyone on campus. There was no doubt at that institution as to 
what the strategy was! 
3. Leadership: Get Serious, or Get Out of the Way 
Organizations often rush to figure out how the troops need to change to live the new 
standards. However, this is not the first task. Perhaps the single biggest difficulty in getting 
an organization to stick to the diet is convincing them that top management really wants 
them to. 
For example, if a group within the firm faces a trade-off between a lesser volume of high­
quality work and a greater volume of "acceptable-quality" work, it is critical that they 

261
©han1ei:l!lis 
understand without ambiguity what choice firm leaders wish them to make. If they believe 
that management, when push comes to shove, wants the second alternative, they will never 
stretch to engage in strategic behaviors themselves. 
If the leadership of the organization wants the people in it to believe that a new strategy is 
being followed, they must figure out a way for it to be credible that they, top management, 
have actually changed their thinking and are prepared to change the way they act, measure 
and reward. 
I have countless examples of failure to do this. I was asked by one firm to run a program 
for their middl.e managers on how to be more effective as managers, but my instructions 
included this: "Please don't raise the topic of how well we ourselves manage these middle 
managers. We know we do that terribly, but we're not ready to discuss that. Keep their at­
tention on what they could do better. We want them to change first." 
Can you imaging a process less likely to get the people in the organization to actually live 
to higher standards? 
A similar event happened when I was asked to moderate a discussion in a firm that wanted 
the people in its different regions to work for the good of the institution, not just their own 
region. Unfortunately, as I ran this discussion, the CEO at the back of the room became 
more and more agitated. 
I later found out that he had turned to his second in command and said, "This guy keeps 
talking about what we in management need to change to become a one-firm firm. We 
wanted him to talk about what the people out in the field need to do." Not surprisingly, 
they never achieved collaboration, and I was never invited back to that firm! 
This illustrates, by the way, the fatal flaw in using all outside speakers and consultants. 
Whether or not they are convincing, educational or inspirational, the question on the 