258
Ghange"fhis 
Which is no shame. Life offers many opportunities to do quite well being competent. You 
don't have to strive for excellence. It's just that if you are not willing to do what it takes to 
achieve excellence, you should probably just shut up about it (internally and externally) and 
stop pretending! 
There is no business benefit in claiming to pursue a goal that everyone can tell you don't 
have the guts to pursue. It not only makes you look foolish to clients, staff and colleagues, 
but it also deeply demoralizes people and breeds cynicism. Declaring your commitment to 
strategies that you don't follow will lower your organization's energy and its profits. 
What Gets People on the Diet? 
If all business improvement is like curing a fat smoker or helping an alcoholic recover, what, 
then, actually gets people and organizations to change? 
We all know the main thing that works: a major crisis! If revenues drop off sharply, it's amaz­
ing how quickly businesses can act to deal with known inefficiencies and bad habits they 
could have tackled years ago. 
And when the first heart attack comes, it's amazing how many people suddenly find the self­
discipline to start living right. 
That's close to what happened to me. Until March 2005, I was a fat smoker. I had been over­
weight for most of my life and smoked a pack a day for 37 years. I don't say that as a confes­
sion. I never pretended that getting fit was my strategy. 
Then, a variety of medical conditions put me into the hospital with a kidney malfunction. In 
the five months that followed, I stopped smoking, started exercising and lost 30 pounds. 

259
@lnan1eilnis 
This was arl wonderful news for me and an amazing and welcome surprise to my family and 
friends, but a depressing conclusion for any theory of change. 
Do people and institutions really have to wait until something very serious happens to them 
to fix things they have known about for years? Isn't there any hope of a better way? 
We know only a few things about getting people to change before the heart attack comes, 
but here are some. 
1. It's About a Permanent Change in Lifestyle 
A major source of failure in implementing sensible business strategies is that we underesti­
mate how much effort is truly required to bring about significant improvement. 
A major reason that only a small proportion of those who try to implement strategic pro­
grams (or stick to diets) ever obtain the benefits they seek is that too many individuals and 
businesses think of improvement (and strategy) as a distinct schedule of activities, separate 
(and sometimes separately accounted for) from regular business activities. In other words, 
there's real life, and then there's the diet. 
Viewed that way, all improvement programs are doomed to failure. As I discuss in the 
"Natural Manager" episode of my Masterclass on Business podcast series, my trainer Jerry 
(Dyelry) Labbate points out that you don't really get the sustained benefits of being an 
exerciser until it has become as natural and permanent a part of your life as brushing your 
teeth and taking a shower each day. Anything less than that will put in jeopardy any short­
term gains you might obtain with bursts of activity. It's about routines, not special events. 