268
©hangeffihis 
Michael Webb, a sales consultant, points out that short-term goals ("Lose a pound a week") 
only take on value in the context of principles, which are long-term. First, one establishes 
what is important; then, you get people to do a little of it, a little more and so on. It is com­
mitment to a process of continuous improvement on things that matter. 
In my article "The Courage to Have a Strategy," I described this as an attitude of "Rome wasn't 
built in a day, but we are building Rome." It can be described as a managerial style of insis­
tent patience. 
Encouragement is an essential ingredient in the recipe. When I began exercising, it was so­
bering to realize how much I needed my trainer's words ("Good, good, David") when I had 
just been able to complete an exercise for the first time; 
At one level, I knew I was pathetically bad, but it really did help to hear his constant encour­
agement: "You're doing much better, David. You might not be able to feel it, but as a trainer I 
can see it." 
I don't know how much of it was him being falsely optimistic, and I am sure it was all a well­
practiced mind game. 
But, as every good trainer knows, that's the point. We all need to play mind games with 
ourselves when we struggle to build new achievements and habits into our lives. ("If I can just 
finish this first one, I'll reward myself with a break. Let me just get this first one done!") 
It also means making a game of strategic programs. Educated professionals may scoff, but 
it's profoundly rooted in the human psyche that if you can make a game of something, it 
helps to sustain strenuous effort. 
Hence all the hoopla of various strategic initiatives such as "Six Sigma," "quality is free" and 
similar fads; business jargon; and prizes, rewards and "black belt" recognition programs. 

269
©hangeThis 
There's a reason such things work, even among cynical people. They help to make a "mind 
game" of the whole thing, creating a framework on which we hang the mind-distracting hab­
its. ("If I can just do this one thing, I can make it. If I change the way I do that, I will be better 
able to stick to things.) 
Good trainers know that life-changing improvement can and does fail by rushing to either of 
the two extremes: establishing improvement goals that are too ambitious or take too long to 
achieve, thus leading to frustration and abandonment of the program, or failing to establish 
any pressure to improve, allowing people to pretend that they plan to get on the program, 
butjust not today. 
The good news in all of this is that, in the world at large, there is experience in helping peo­
ple make significant improvement in their lives. There are well-documented methodologies; 
they are just not the ones we usually associate with the business world. 
If we are prepared to rethink how we view strategy and business life, then people can achieve 
things they never thought possible. If I can become a fit, non-smoking exerciser, there's truly 
no limit! 
Copyright © David Maister 