264
@bangeJ7bis 
The motivation must be intrinsic. Since the essence of successful strategic change is not 
technique, but will. If you prefer, you can call it determination, commitment or resolve. 
To achieve any goal, you must really want the goal. The common questions presented when 
discussing strategies and strategic change are these: "Do we have to do this? Why, when 
things are going so well, do we need to accept more discipline into our lives?'' 
The answer, of course, is that you don't have to do anything you don't want to do. Strategy 
in a professional business is a choice that each individual has to make about whether he or 
she wants to put more effort into his or her life and career in order to get somewhere new. 
In professional firms, it is dangerous to assume that every person, or every partner, does. 
That's why most firms (and most individuals) don't pull off their strategies: not everyone 
in the firm actually wants to try that hard. They will say they want to be the clear market 
leader in their field; they are just not willing to do what that takes. 
It's valid for them to make this choice. After all, I was a fat smoker for 37 years and felt 
I had the right to remain so. For me and for others, the single biggest barrier to making 
change is the feeling that "it's OK so far." People don't disagree that the future state of be­
ing a non-smoker would be beneficial, but they resist when they are told that they have to 
do it. 
Brad Robitaille, a Canadian lawyer, points out that while execution of a strategic plan is 
hard work, it must be hard work that a person loves to do, because only passion creates 
the determination to continue. He also notes that "no one can instill passion in anyone 
else's heart." It must come from within. If the hard work inherent in executing the disci­
plines of strategy is merely a by-product of duty and obligation, then the battle is lost 
before it has even begun. 

265
1 
@hangejljlfiis 
One of a leader's roles is to act as a coach, drawing people's attention to what is not per­
fect about the status quo (i.e., creating dissatisfaction), whether things could actually be 
better, and whether the desired change is both achievable and desirable. But it's subtle 
stuff-the leader must be skilled in not only knowing the answers to these questions, but 
also in the process of helping others think it through to a personal conclusion. 
6. People Must Get On or Off the Bus 
Every individual can, and must, make a personal choice. But then the organization must 
decide how to respond to those individual choices. For an organization, strategy cannot be 
what "most of us, most of the time" do. You'll never be good enough as a firm if participa­
tion in your firm's definition of excellence is optional. 
If a number of top people have clearly not signed up for the journey or are clearly not true 
believers, no number of systems or amount of inspired speech making will get the organi­
zation there. Strategy making in professional firms is as often about getting some senior 
people to leave as it is about bringing new people in. 
Jim Collins in Good to Great called this "getting the right people on and off the bus" and 
identified it as the first step in all programs for strategic greatness. 
Everyone in the organization has to decide if they want to try hard enough to sacrifice some 
of the present to achieve a better tomorrow. They may do so if they believe the effort is 
serious. They definitely will not if they think those at the top are undecided or are divided. 
Professional firms are afraid of this conclusion. They try to work around the skeptics, the 
non-believers and the non-participants in their senior ranks, preferring to hold on to 
revenue volume rather than achieve a senior team who all want to go to the same place and 
have the same resolve to get there. That's fine, but you can't call it strategy. 