256
~laangej)jf'iis 
Improving the quality of the analysis is not where the problem lies. The necessary outcome of 
strategic planning is not analytical insight but resolve. 
The essential questions of strategy are these: "Which of our habits are we really prepared to 
change, permanently and forever? Which lifestyle changes are we really prepared to make? 
What issues are we really ready to tackle?" 
Now that's a different tone of conversation and discussion (and the reason the real debate 
is so often avoided). Discussing goals is stimulating, inspiring and energizing. Discussing 
what disciplines you are prepared to accept to get to a goal feels tough, awkward, annoying, 
frightening and completely unpleasant. 
An Illustration 
As an example, consider the familiar strategic topic of aiming for competitive differentia­
tion through excellence in client service. Here are three real-world examples of programs to 
achieve this goal: 
Once a quarter, an email is sent by the CEO to all active clients (without consultation with the 
lead people serving those clients), asking them to click on one of three buttons in the email: 
green if they are satisfied with the way their work is being handled, amber if they have some 
concerns, and red if they are unhappy. 
The CEO personally reviews all the email replies, every day, following up on every single one 
that is not a green. Every quarter, the group averages on this score are published for each 
operating unit within the firm (every office, every discipline area) and distributed to everyone 
in the organization. Even the mail room clerks can see each quarter how well the senior vice 
presidents in each group are doing on client satisfaction. 

257
Changeihis 
At compensation-setting time, the relevant senior management group conducts a phone or 
face-to-face interview with every client that partner has served in the last year (or a scientifi­
cally chosen random sample if the numbers are too high to be practical). 
These client assessments carry a significant (40 to 60 percent) weighting in pay. You can't 
get paid for selling or doing more volume unless it is more volume of highly satisfied clients. 
There is no reward for more volume of only moderately satisfied clients. 
The organization adopts and publicizes an unconditional satisfaction guarantee, allowing 
clients to pay only what they thought the work was worth if they were disappointed. 
These are just three examples of how to enforce the same strategic idea. Other ideas may be 
superior. The debate you would need to have in your firm, if you really want to pursue this or 
any other strategic goal, would be a series of questions: 
Which diet, if integrated into our normal running of the firm, would actually get us to perform 
at a higher level, enough to achieve the benefits we seek? 
Which would we be prepared to adopt as a central part of our regular lifestyle? 
If we don't like any of these diets, can anyone think of another that will have as much force as 
these, but that we could live with more easily? 
Substitutes are allowed. No one diet idea is without flaw, and there are drawbacks to every 
program. If asked what the best way to lose weight is, the only sensible answer is: "Whatever 
diet you will stick to!" 
However, if there is no specific diet that all your people can agree to follow, then you must 
conclude that you are not really willing or able to pursue that strategic goal. 