2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
22
Public trust is the not-for-profit (NFP) sector’s most valuable asset. The sector has 
enjoyed historically high levels of trust which it has leveraged to make its substantial 
contribution to the Australian community . 
However, in recent years, trust has been in decline globally, including in the NFP sector. 
The Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission’s Public trust and confidence in 
Australian Charities 2017 report (the ACNC Report) has observed an erosion of trust over 
a number of years. Trust in charities has declined from 37 per cent in 2013 to 30 per cent 
in 2015 and down to 24 per cent in 2017. Other research on this topic has borne similar 
results.
ADDRESSING DECLINING TRUST 
It appears that while the significance of trust is well-established in the NFP sector, 
there is little evidence of directors taking an active approach to addressing trust 
through active governance approaches. 
Our own research on trust identified culture as the most significant issue relevant to trust 
for NFP organisations. 
The AICD investigated culture in our 2017 NFP Governance and Performance Study. 
This study found that directors generally felt that the culture of their organisation was 
strong (most directors rated their culture above 8 out of 10). However, very few directors 
received reports on culture and a majority didn’t even have it as an item on their agenda. 
Trust in not-for-profits
Figure 15  
The most critical issues relating to trust for my organisation are:
Internal culture and practices
Customer satisfaction/product & service quality
Financial responsibility and sustainability
74.1%
62.9%
43.4%

companydirectors.com.au
23
It is clear that directors appreciate the importance of culture and its relationship to trust. 
However, the great majority of NFP boards are not governing trust. If culture is the most 
critical issue relevant to trust, but it is also not on the agenda for boards, this represents a 
significant blind spot in the practice of directorship among NFPs. 
THE DRIVERS OF DISTRUST
Trust in NFPs is driven by a number of factors and varies significantly based on 
demographic indicators and association with the sector. According to the ACNC Report, 
the key influencers of trust are an individual’s belief in an organisation’s mission and 
transparency about use of resources, particularly its fundraising activities. 
Fundraising conduct is a critical issue for trust in the NFP sector. Recent media attention 
has focused on the proportion of funds paid to third-party for-profit fundraisers, as well 
as the behaviour and employment conditions of face-to-face fundraisers, sometimes called 
‘charity muggers’ or ‘chuggers’. 
The ACNC Report found that 45 per cent of respondents did not trust charities that paid 
salespeople to raise funds on their behalf. The report also found that since 2015, fewer 
Australians trust charities to apply their donations to a charitable purpose and to be ethical 
and honest in their fundraising. 
There can be no doubt that conduct in fundraising can erode trust, and indeed may have 
already done so. 
QUESTIONS FOR DIRECTORS: 
• How does our culture contribute to (or erode) trust in our organisation?
• Do we know what our culture is and how do we know this?
• What strategies are in place to maintain and, if necessary, change our culture? 
Number of times discussed in a year 
Figure 16 
Number of times discussed in a year
Reports on culture received (this year)
0 1 2 3 4 5+
Culture formally on the agenda (this year)
48%
52%
15%
15%
12%
14%
8%
8%
6%
3%
11%
8%
45.0%
Distrust in charities 
that paid salespeople 
to raise funds on their 
behalf

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
24
Donors expect that their donation will be applied, in the main, to the purpose for which it 
was collected. While there might be some flexibility in how these donations are collected 
and used (even the leanest of organisation will have some administration costs), there is a 
limit, and the consequences for transgressing this expectation are extreme. 
LEARNING FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM 
In 2015 a fundraising scandal erupted in the United Kingdom (UK) after the tragic 
suicide of Olive Cooke, Britain’s oldest poppy seller. Mrs Cook was reported to have 
felt “distressed and overwhelmed” by the 3,000 mailings she received annually from 
charities soliciting donations. A report by the Fundraising Standards Board found that 
at the time of her death, 99 charities possessed her details, 70 per cent of which had 
obtained these details via a third party . 
The ensuing scandal was ruinous to the reputation of and public trust in the UK NFP sector.
A report released by the UK Charity Commission (Public trust and confidence in charities 
2016) showed trust to be at its lowest since data was recorded on this topic in 2005. 
The most influential causes of this collapse in trust had been media reports about 
charities’ operations (33 per cent) and how charities spend donations (32 per cent). 
The reputational damage was significant enough to warrant the attention of the 
parliament, resulting in an inquiry into ‘The 2015 charity fundraising controversy’.  
The inquiry singled out directors of charities as failing in their duty to effectively 
govern fundraising and concluded in one line: ‘It would be a sad and inexcusable 
failure of charities to govern their own behaviour, should statutory regulation became 
necessary .’ Despite this, the inquiry also observed that the vast majority of charities 
were not involved in misconduct. 
Nevertheless, additional regulation followed, media scrutiny of fundraising practices in 
the UK persists and trust continues to decline. This should serve as a reminder to boards 
that government is willing and able to intercede where trust is eroded to critical levels.
LESSONS FOR NFP BOARDS
Trust is an invaluable asset that the NFP sector shares as a collective and which has 
experienced some damage in recent times. The hard truth for NFP directors is that 
while we may not be, as individuals, responsible for the damage done to trust, we are 
influenced by it as a collective. By extension, we are also collectively responsible for 
restoring this trust. 
“ NFP directors 
must see 
themselves as 
the protectors 
of trust, 
both in their 
individual 
organisations 
and across 
the broader 
ecosystem.”
QUESTIONS FOR DIRECTORS: 
• What oversight do we have of our fundraising activities?
• How do we govern those collecting on our behalf?
• Would our stakeholders support the way we collect and use donors’ funds? 