companydirectors.com.au
7
them. This contradiction seems utterly 
confounding and begs the question, why?
WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN TO 
TURN THINGS AROUND? HOW DO 
ORGANISATIONS REGAIN PUBLIC 
TRUST?
In the last 12 months alone, I’ve had 
the opportunity to work with three 
different industries where loss or 
potential loss of social licence is a 
genuine threat. I found that boards 
can spend too much time asking ‘how 
does this impact our business’ when 
they should be asking ‘how does our 
business impact on people?’.
For any organisation that is truly 
committed to protecting their 
trustworthiness – or for some, looking 
to rebuild trust they have lost – they 
only have to go to one place: the most 
vulnerable, marginalised or  
alternative voices (potentially)  
impacted by their organisation. 
How do you know what the right  
things are to do, if you haven’t 
thoroughly understood what the 
issues are that are at the root cause 
of problems with stakeholders. Our 
most marginal and disenfranchised 
stakeholders – those who are too easily 
dismissed – are often exactly  
the ones pointing us to the very issues 
we should be responding to. If ignored, 
these issues eventually balloon into 
major news headlines (as they have 
before) that surprise and disappoint  
the public and ultimately erode their 
trust in institutions (and lead to even 
more scrutiny). 
Vulnerable stakeholders are the ones 
we have difficultly hearing because 
their voices are filtered out by layers of 
management that are using a business-
only lens to prioritise their biggest risks. 
Vulnerable customers, in particular, are 
your ‘canaries in the coalmine’, sensitive 
to issues that could affect a wider 
group unless your business listens, 
understands and appropriately responds 
to the harm it currently causes. 
My experience working with Australian 
boards and this directors’ survey show 
that a change is happening in how 
stakeholder voices are heard and made 
sense of. In the past, businesses too often 
have “shot the messenger” when they 
weren’t comfortable with the message, or 
prepared to consider the impact of their 
actions or operations on people. 
A SOCIAL LICENCE MUST BE EARNED 
EVERY DAY
I see an increasing openness and 
willingness to have a dialogue between 
an organisation and its critics. Even 
those that were instinctively labelled 
as “alternative” or “radical” are now 
seen as stakeholders worth engaging. I 
have spent my career anticipating this 
tipping point and bringing a human 
rights lens into the heart of business 
so it can see where it is or potentially 
causing harm. 
Developing a deep understanding of 
all the voices within and outside your 
organisation requires a willingness 
to listen to a broader range of 
stakeholders. It also calls for sensitive, 
expert qualitative and quantitative 
research that goes well beyond a ‘tick-
the-box’ or compliance exercise. 
“Vulnerable 
stakeholders 
are the ones 
we have 
difficultly 
hearing 
because their 
voices are 
filtered out 
by layers of 
management 
that are using 
a business-
only lens to 
prioritise their 
biggest risks”

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
8
My experience leads me to believe 
that it is only through meaningful 
consideration of the issues and 
impacts raised and perceived by your 
stakeholders that future impacts can be 
effectively predicted. 
This results in tangible opportunities 
for organisations to choose a way 
forward that eliminates the harm it may 
cause. A company’s full assessment 
of major decisions needs to involve 
the systematic prediction of negative 
impacts to be eliminated as well as 
the identification of opportunities to 
strengthen positive impacts. 
While change is happening in 
organisational governance in Australia 
the deepening level of distrust signals a 
more significant change is needed. Each 
organisation needs to incorporate new 
practices within their governance to 
steward stakeholder voices, especially 
the quiet that aren’t heard or the noisy 
that are quickly dismissed. Processes 
are needed to make sense of these 
voices, and to cut through with decision 
makers so they can respond to the 
current and emerging issues where an 
organisation has the potential to cause 
harm – particularly to harm peoples’ 
human rights. Our survey shows many 
organisations still lack these formal 
processes and could be vulnerable to a 
trust crisis.
Ultimately, social license is maintained 
by organisations that are responsive 
to changing community concerns and 
expectations. Society has a powerful 
ability to tell companies when they are 
no longer wanted. After listening, and 
understanding, organisations must act 
upon what is heard in a sensitive and 
timely manner. Most importantly, they 
must be publicly seen to act upon that 
information. A social licence is a licence 
that must be earned every day . 
“While change 
is happening in 
organisational 
governance in Australia 
the deepening level of 
distrust signals a more 
significant change is 
needed.”
Richard Boele 
National Leader, Human Rights and 
Social Impact Services, KPMG Australia

companydirectors.com.au
9
Participants in the survey were asked to answer a range of questions on issues 
affecting trust at their organisation. There were two types of questions in the 
survey: one type asked respondents to select from a range of options the most 
critical issues or factors affecting trust issues; the second type asked respondents to 
answer on a scale of ‘1’ to ‘9’ increasing in positivity whether certain processes or 
protocols were in place at their organisation. Responses of ‘7’ and above were taken 
as indicating a yes answer, responses ‘3’ and below a no. Where ‘6’ responses may 
affect the interpretation of results, a parenthetical note has been made in the body 
of the report. 
Methodological note