companydirectors.com.au
13
Figure 4  
To maintain trust in my organisation, the most critical stakeholders are:
Figure 5  
My board has a proactive approach to building trust in 
the organisation with its most important stakeholders
Figure 6  
My board has a proactive approach to building trust in the organisation with 
all of its stakeholders
82.3%
33.4% 16.4% 7.7% 4.0%
81.6% 35.0% 34.8%
Customers/Clients
Shareholders
Employees
General public
Government
Other
Local/Regional community
Media
Figure 12. My board has a proactive approach to building trust in the organisation with its most 
important stakeholders
4.5% 5.2% 5.1%
7.7%
11.2%
17.8% 18.4%
15.4% 14.7%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 13. My board has a proactive approach to building trust in the organisation with its most 
important stakeholders
5.1%
7.5% 9.1% 10.7%
14.3% 15.0% 16.1%
9.6%
12.6%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
14
KEY ISSUES AFFECTING TRUST
Although company directors feel a greater sense of responsibility to the wider 
communities they serve, ‘Internal culture and practices’ was voted by directors 
as the most critical issue relating to trust (74.1 per cent of respondents selected 
the issue as part of their top three) (Fig. 7). Poor culture can lead individuals to 
make decisions and interact with external stakeholders in ways that may cause 
stakeholders to question the credibility, reliability and integrity of their organisation 
as a whole. This suggests that issues that impact trust can originate from inside the 
organisation, as much – if not more – than from its business activities. Our findings 
also reflect the AICD’s latest Director Sentiment Index, which found that more than 
90 per cent of directors surveyed were making efforts to improve the corporate 
culture of their organisation. Unfortunately, many attempts from the top are in vain 
if employees view those attempts as inauthentic, or they are undermined by media 
reports of misconduct.
The second most critical issue according to respondents was ‘customer satisfaction 
and product/service quality’ (62.9 per cent) (Fig. 7). Delivering a consistent, reliable 
product or service undoubtedly remains critical to building trust and maintaining 
social licence, by demonstrating the organisation’s competence. Likewise, financial 
responsibility and sustainability remains important and was identified as the third 
most critical issue (43.4 per cent) (Fig. 7).
An organisation’s ability to demonstrate its social values and contribution to society 
was rated as the fourth issue relating to trust by directors surveyed (36.4 per cent) 
(Fig. 7). Organisations in all sectors – public, private and NFP – are now expected 
to be accountable for demonstrating their commitment and positive contribution to 
both their local community and society more broadly . 
The ongoing interest in creating shared value and social procurement, for example, 
reflects this shift in the conception of social impact and the role that companies 
can and should play above and beyond philanthropy and traditional community 
investment. Organisations are finding ways to meaningfully solve social problems 
through their core business and are looking for opportunities to improve people’s 
lives throughout their value chain. Institutions that are seen to have an authentic, 
meaningful social purpose have a much better chance at maintaining trust and social 
licence in the long-term. They are also more likely to be given the benefit of the 
doubt if and when things go wrong. 
The general public now has unprecedented access to information (and 
misinformation) enabled by use of social media and a 24 hour news cycle. As a 
result, an expanding plethora of issues are escalated to boardrooms. Whether it is a 
noisy construction site or child labour found in the supply chain – people will learn 
about these issues, talk about them, share them with the world and let organisations 
know what they think. For example, the activist campaign against coal seam gas 
exploration in NSW or news developing around the Keystone Pipeline showed 
“Stakeholder 
groups around 
the world are 
successfully 
harnessing 
social media 
to amplify 
awareness and 
reach of their 
campaigns to 
drive action, 
and assign 
accountability 
for negative 
impacts.”

companydirectors.com.au
15
how much public opinion and land ownership issues can impact major projects. It 
demonstrated how stakeholder groups are successfully harnessing social media to 
amplify the awareness and reach of their campaigns to drive action, and to assign 
accountability for negative aspects. 
Interestingly, however, only 7.7 per cent of respondents perceive that the media is 
a key stakeholder for maintaining trust. The ‘general public’ was seen as a critical 
stakeholder for over twice as many respondents (16.4 per cent) (Fig. 4).
Figure 7  
The most critical issues relating to trust for my organisation are:
Internal culture and practices
Customer satisfaction/product & service quality
Financial responsibility and sustainability
Demonstrating social values/contribution to society
Employee satisfaction
Data management and cyber security
Shareholder relations
Media and government relations
Protection of the environment
Supply chain management
Company tax
74.1%
62.9%
43.4%
36.4%
25.3%
22.9%
14.2%
13.8%
6.6%
3.0%
0.7%