companydirectors.com.au
25
QUESTIONS FOR DIRECTORS: 
What are we doing to maintain trust in our organisation?
NFP directors identify the top three factors most critical to building trust as:
• Communicating and engaging openly with stakeholders;
• Transparency of business practices and decision-making; and
• Understanding the issues that matter to stakeholders. 
Our research shows that NFP directors do not understand or respond to trust differently to directors 
in the private or public sector. It is clear that simply undertaking work that is beneficial to the 
community is not enough to build (or restore) trust . 
NFP directors must see themselves as the protectors of trust, both in their individual organisations 
and across the broader ecosystem. They must be active in exercising their governance 
responsibilities to protect trust and to imbed consideration of factors that affect trust in their 
decision making. 
The relationship between NFPs and their donors should be in sharp focus for all boards. Today’s 
donors have access to detailed information about how an NFP uses their contribution and this 
increased transparency must be accounted for by boards. 
Importantly, boards must be satisfied that they have appropriate governance oversight over any 
activities that have the ability to affect the public’s trust. Trust is won and lost in the satisfaction 
or otherwise of stakeholders’ expectations, and these should be understood and reflected in the 
governance of all organisations, NFP or otherwise. 
Lucas Ryan GAICD  
Senior Policy Adviser, Australian 
Institute of Company Directors

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
26
Richard Boele
National Leader 
Human Rights and Social Impact Services  
KPMG Australia 
e: rboele@kpmg.com.au
Rita Fentener Van Vlissingen
Associate Director  
Human Rights and Social Impact Services  
KPMG Australia 
e: ritafentener@kpmg.com.au
Madeline Greer
Senior Consultant 
Human Rights and Social Impact Services  
KPMG Australia 
e: mgreer@kpmg.com.au
Elizabeth Still
Head of Strategic Alliances and Events 
Australian Institute  
of Company Directors 
e: estill@aicd.com.au
Lucas Ryan
Senior Policy Adviser 
Australian Institute  
of Company Directors 
e: lryan@aicd.com.au
Ivan Ah Sam
Communications Manager 
Australian Institute  
of Company Directors 
e: iahsam@aicd.com.au
Contact us
MEDIA
Ian Welch
Associate Director 
Brand & Engagement  
KPMG Australia 
e: iwelch@kpmg.com.au
Carissa Simons
Media Manager 
Australian Institute  
of Company Directors 
e: csimons@aicd.com.au 

