2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
10
THE STATE OF TRUST IN 2018
As the ‘crisis of trust’ in institutions continues to dominate global and national 
headlines, encouraging conversations are being held in Australian boardrooms where 
trust remains front of mind. 
In our recent survey, completed by almost 600 directors, 94.1 per cent of 
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that trust was important to their 
organisations’ sustainability (Fig. 1). 
Almost half (45.8 per cent) of directors reported that their board had to deal with 
issues that can affect trust in their organisation over the past year (Fig. 2).
Respondents were involved in organisations across all sectors with 40.7 per cent 
coming from private business, 30.8 per cent NFPs, 14.0 per cent public sector and 
11.2 per cent from listed companies (Fig. 3).
Survey report
Figure 1  
Trust in my organisation is important to its long-term sustainability
0.2% 0.2% 1.0% 0.7%
3.8%
15.6%
21.0%
57.5%
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

companydirectors.com.au
11
TRUST AND SOCIAL LICENCE
At the same time, an important shift in mindset is happening: directors are starting 
to ask questions about their organisation’s social licence to operate. 
Social licence is an important and powerful lens to frame trust. It acknowledges the 
active role that people and communities play in granting ongoing acceptance and 
approval of how companies – or entire industries – conduct their business. 
Aggrieved and cynical communities can withdraw the social licence of organisations 
that lose or exploit their trust – with potentially devastating financial, legal and 
regulatory impacts.
Organisations can no longer view trust as an asset that they can buy or re-build after 
a crisis, but one that must be earned and maintained on an ongoing basis. Boards of 
all sectors are increasingly aware that fundamentally, trust is about relationships, not 
solely reputation.
Figure 2  
In the last 12 months, my board has had to deal with issues that could 
undermine trust in the organisation
Figure 3  
Respondents by sector
11.2% 14.0% 40.7% 30.8% 3.3%
Not-for-Profit UndisclosedListed Public Private
Figure 4. In the last 12 months, my board has had to deal with issues that could undermine trust in 
the organisation
9.3% 8.2% 6.6% 7.0%
11.7% 11.4% 13.5%
8.9%
23.4%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
12
IN PEOPLE WE TRUST
A significant loss of trust is affecting all pillars of society – including government, 
business, media and NGOs. 1 This reflects a growing sense that institutions are failing 
people. We no longer place unquestioning trust in systems and institutions. Instead, 
trust is now more likely to flow between local networks, individuals and peers, and 
has facilitated the development of the sharing economy and businesses such as 
Uber and Airbnb that have disrupted entire industries and business models. 2 
At the same time – and perhaps as a result of the growing disconnect with 
institutions – stakeholders across the whole value chain now demand more from 
the individuals who represent these institutions. 
Trust in organisations is increasingly becoming about people: those who lead 
organisations by making decisions and those who are interested in or impacted by 
those decisions. 
WHO MATTERS TO BOARDS NOW?
Our survey asked AICD members to identify the three most critical stakeholders 
whose trust their organisation needed to maintain.
Boards overwhelmingly see ‘clients or customers’ and ‘employees’ as the 
two most critical stakeholders to maintain trust in an organisation, as selected 
by 82.3 and 81.6 per cent of survey respondents respectively (Fig. 4). 
Our survey findings also echo a fundamental principle of social licence – the local 
or regional community in which an organisation operates was selected as 
the third most critical stakeholder for Australian boards (in the top three for 
35.0 per cent of respondents), followed closely by government (34.8 per cent) and 
shareholders (33.4 per cent) (Fig. 4). This acknowledges that the people who live 
and work around an organisation and its assets or operations – and therefore are 
most likely to be directly impacted by these operations – are key custodians of an 
organisation’s social licence. 
Interestingly, less than half (48.4 per cent) of company directors who responded 
felt that their board has a proactive approach to building trust with the 
organisation’s most important stakeholders (though this rises to over two-thirds 
if mildly positive ‘6’ responses on the nine point scale for the question are included) 
(Fig.5). Only 38.3 per cent felt that they had a proactive approach to building trust 
with all of the organisation’s stakeholders (rising to just over half including ‘6’ 
responses) (Fig 6).
A majority of organisations still need to proactively improve their relationships 
with all stakeholders, rather than with one or two priority groups.
1 https:/ /www.edelman.com/trust-barometer
2 http:/ /www.afr.com/brand/boss/three-reasons-why-the-trust-shift-threatens-all-institutions-rachel-botsman-20170507-gvzsc4
“Stakeholders 
across the 
whole value 
chain now 
demand more 
from the 
individuals 
who represent 
these 
institutions”