2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
16
KEY FACTORS FOR BUILDING TRUST
Communicating and engaging with stakeholders openly was seen as the most 
critical factor for building trust (82.0 per cent) (Fig. 8). 
Organisations which have forged deep and meaningful connections with 
stakeholders tend to know the issues that are material, and are proactive in 
responding to emerging threats to their social licence. Active listening processes 
can help boards understand or manage negative social and environmental impacts 
of their activities. Or better yet – design operations to avoid the negative impacts 
in the first place.
However, boards may only hear the loudest or most outrageous voices are those 
that are heard most often, simply because they have gone viral. This reflects one of 
the most significant challenges with designing a truly inclusive listening approach. 
Vulnerable, marginalised and alternative voices in the community and within other 
stakeholder groups must receive special attention – either because they are more 
likely to experience negative impacts, or their circumstances mean they are less 
equipped to advocate or likely to be heard. 
Organisations need a multi-channel, radical engagement approach to truly hear 
vulnerable, marginalised and alternative voices. That approach will address 
systemic barriers that affect vulnerable groups’ ability to raise concerns through 
traditional avenues. Good listening processes can help boards understand the 
stakeholder concerns and issues that may spread rapidly, or be experienced by a 
critical mass. Boards can therefore gain an ‘early warning’ of emerging issues that 
may become significant threats to social licence.
The second factor that was seen as critical to building trust by respondents was the 
transparency of business practices and decision-making (78.0 per cent)  
(Fig. 8). This focus on transparency ahead of responsiveness to social and 
environmental impacts, 17.8 per cent and 10.0 per cent respectively (Fig. 8), 
reflects the desire of AICD members to invest in the nature of their relationships 
with stakeholders as a critical step to building trust. Genuinely engaging 
stakeholders in the decisions that are important to them – and building deeper 
and more meaningful relationships through this process – is likely to have an even 
bigger positive impact on trust. 
NEW BOARD COMPETENCIES NEEDED 
Company directors are having to engage in increasingly diverse and complex topics 
that can affect trust in their organisation, sometimes well beyond the traditional 
business agendas. Boards – as a collective – need to understand and respond to 
threats and opportunities caused by disruptive business models, new industries, 
and emerging stakeholder expectations, if their organisations are to survive the 
‘crisis of trust’. 
“ Organisations 
need a multi-
channel, 
radical 
engagement 
approach to 
truly hear 
vulnerable, 
marginalised 
and alternative 
voices, and 
to address 
systemic 
barriers that 
affect their 
ability to 
raise concerns 
through 
traditional 
avenues.”

companydirectors.com.au
17
At the same time, stricter global standards, digital disruption, policy and regulatory 
shifts, shareholder activism and ever-evolving corporate reporting requirements – 
including the greater focus on non-financial value drivers – are creating additional 
pressure on boards. The role that company directors are expected to play, 
individually and on the board, is also under increased scrutiny . Comments by our 
survey respondents indicate that some of the skills now needed to meaningfully 
listen, engage and connect with stakeholders, are evolving beyond some boards’ 
comfort zones. Specifically, a minority of survey respondents feel that some of their 
peers lack the understanding and competence to address issues affecting trust, and 
believe that complacency and reluctance to engage can mean companies risk ‘taking 
[stakeholders’] trust for granted’.
HOW DO BOARDS MAKE SENSE OF THE NEW LANDSCAPE?
The factors contributing to trust are more dynamic and interrelated than ever before. 
Understanding the issues that can affect trust, how they affect trust and how to 
respond in a way that can maintain or enhance trust is an ongoing challenge. 
There are simply too many issues to address all of them with the same level of 
focus; boards must prioritise and focus on those that are most likely to impact 
their organisation and its stakeholders. To achieve this, boards rely on the effective 
escalation of data and reports from management on the issues that could undermine 
trust in the organisation.
Figure 8  
The most critical factors for building trust in my organisation are:
Communicating 
and engaging 
with our 
stakeholders 
openly
Maintaining social 
licence to operate 
(i.e. ongoing 
acceptance or 
approval by the 
community)
Transparency 
of business 
practices and 
decision-making
Responsiveness 
to social issues 
and impacts
Understanding 
of the issues that 
matter to our 
stakeholders
Responsiveness 
to environmental 
issues and 
impacts
Figure 2. The most critical factors for building trust in my organisation are
82.0% 78.0% 64.7% 41.3% 17.8% 10.0%

2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
18
The results, however, suggest a mixed picture in the extent to which organisations 
have formal processes for escalating trust issues to the board level. Over half 
(54.2 per cent) of respondents said their board regularly receives reports from 
management on such issues (Fig. 9). 
Only 38.5 per cent believed the board had clear processes for responding to 
these issues, though the figure rises to over half if including weaker positive ‘6’ 
results on the nine point scale used for the question (Fig. 10). 
Some boards may be preoccupied by crisis management and preventing the erosion 
of trust, when they could be playing a forward-looking role, and spending more time 
strengthening their organisation’s social licence.
In the survey, 23.8 per cent of respondents said their boards receive 
meaningful performance metrics on trust in the organisation (rising to 
around a third when including weaker positive ‘6’ responses) (Fig. 11). This 
suggests a potential ‘blind spot’ for many boards that should be addressed in future 
conversations. Reputation metrics and customer surveys are an established and 
relatively comparable indicator, but it remains uncertain whether they truly capture 
the breadth and richness of issues that are most relevant to social licence and trust.  
Figure 10  
My board has clear processes for responding to issues that could undermine trust 
in the organisation
Figure 5. My board has clear processes for responding to issues that could undermine trust in the 
organisationn
4.0% 5.1% 7.9%
12.4%
17.0% 15.2% 16.6%
9.6% 12.2%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 9  
My board regularly receives reports from management on issues that 
could undermine trust in the organisation
Figure 7. My board regularly receives reports from management on issues that could undermine 
trust in the organisation
4.4% 5.8% 7.2% 5.9%
11.4% 11.2%
20.5%
12.2%
21.5%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9