06457_18
Important Notice
The information contained in this document is of a general nature and is not intended to address the objectives, financial situation or needs of any particular 
individual or entity. It is provided for information purposes only and does not constitute, nor should it be regarded in any manner whatsoever, as advice 
and is not intended to influence a person in making a decision, including, if applicable, in relation to any financial product or an interest in a financial 
product. Although we endeavour to provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such information is accurate as of the date it is 
received or that it will continue to be accurate in the future. No one should act on such information without appropriate professional advice after a thorough 
examination of the particular situation.
To the extent permissible by law, KPMG and its associated entities shall not be liable for any errors, omissions, defects or misrepresentations in the 
information or for any loss or damage suffered by persons who use or rely on such information (including for reasons of negligence, negligent misstatement 
or otherwise).
© 2018 KPMG, an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International 
Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. 
 The KPMG name and logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of KPMG International. 
Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation.
Copyright 
Copyright strictly reserved. The text, graphics and layout of this guide are protected by Australian copyright law and the comparable law of other countries. 
The copyright of this material is vested in the Australian Institute of Company Directors. No part of this material can be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form, or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval systems without the written 
permission of the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
© Australian Institute of Company Directors 2018