2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
4
The evidence is clear and worrying that Australia, like many other nations around 
the world, is facing a crisis of trust in institutions.
The 2018 Edelman Trust Barometer, a global survey on institutional trust 
conducted by public relations firm Edelman, registered declines in trust in Australia 
across all four institutional groups it covers – government, media, business and 
non-government organisations (NGOs). All four groups are now at five year lows in 
terms of trust and all four fall below the critical 50 per cent threshold – the point 
where they are classified as distrusted. Trust levels in government and the media 
are languishing in the 30s. The picture is similar globally with the 2018 Barometer 
showing no general recovery in levels of trust following the 2017 Barometer, which 
recorded the largest ever decline in trust in a single year over the 17 years the 
survey has been conducted.
A range of factors has contributed to the breakdown of institutional trust around 
the globe over the last decade. The global financial crisis shattered faith in 
institutions fundamental to a functioning economy . The rapid pace of technological 
change and automation has created anxiety among workers. Over the last two 
years, the ‘fake news’ phenomenon has undermined trust in media and increased 
partisanship. The uneven distribution of the benefits of globalisation and trade have 
fostered resentment and populism, even while they continue to be essential for 
prosperity, particularly for a relatively small country like Australia.
The questions being asked of institutions do not have easy answers. 
The problems of inequality, housing affordability and wage growth stagnation are 
real and front of mind in the electorate and in the workforce. It is incumbent on 
leaders across all sectors to engage with stakeholders, listen to their concerns and 
have an honest conversation about the challenges and opportunities we face as a 
society . Three word slogans will not suffice. Policies, in some circumstances, will 
need to change to ensure that groups of people are not left behind. Businesses 
will need to adapt and step up to meet community expectations. At the same time, 
leaders will need to defend reform and why it is crucial if Australia is to continue to 
grow the pie.
Now, perhaps more than ever before, the private sector, including businesses and 
not-for-profits (NFPs), cannot wait for government to take the lead. The acceleration 
of the media cycle caused by social media, the capriciousness of party rooms in 
leadership struggles and the necessity of wrangling minor party votes in the Senate, 
all mean that we should not be waiting for government to address the problems 
that have led to the breakdown of trust. Business and NFPs in Australia are still in a 
Preface
“The evidence 
is clear and 
worrying that 
Australia, like 
many other 
nations around 
the world, is 
facing a crisis 
of trust in 
institutions.”

companydirectors.com.au
5
relatively trusted position compared to government. A deeper dive into the results 
of the Edelman survey shows that 65 per cent of Australians believe CEOs should 
take the lead on change, rather than government – evidence that business’ mandate 
has broadened.
Former Treasury secretary, NAB Chairman and Australian Governance Summit 
keynote speaker Dr Ken Henry AC offered a stirring call to arms to the business 
community in a recent interview with the AICD’s Company Director magazine.
“Businesspeople don’t often talk openly about their vision for Australia and the 
things they see their businesses doing that make a positive contribution to the pursuit 
of that vision. They need to do so in order to build... trust. I say to businesspeople: 
let’s just pretend government doesn’t exist. How would our conversation go? There’d 
be no point in writing up a list of demands. Whatever our aspirations for Australia’s 
future, why don’t we try to solve some of these problems ourselves?”
It is heartening to see in the results of this survey that directors, not just from 
business but from all sectors, are heeding that call and are acutely aware of the 
need to win the trust of stakeholders. There was near unanimity among respondents 
that trust is important to the sustainability of their organisation and more than 
four fifths of directors saw open communication with stakeholders as critical. At 
the same time, the survey results suggest more needs to be done to build processes 
at many organisations so that issues that may lead to a breakdown of trust can be 
formally addressed.
The AICD has been at the forefront of work to foster a discussion around trust in 
the boardroom and at the policy level in Australia. As Graham Bradley AM FAICD, 
Graincorp Chairman, said in delivering the 2017 Essential Director Update, the 
AICD’s annual summary of the latest on directors’ duties and responsibilities,  
“The social licence to operate is absolutely essential to ongoing community support 
[for organisations]”. Trust lies at the heart of this.
We are proud to partner with KPMG on this important report to continue the 
conversation about how we as directors can help to restore the community’s trust.
Elizabeth Proust ao faicd 
Chairman, Australian Institute  
of Company Directors 


2018 KPMG - AICD TRUST SURVEY
6
The catastrophic breakdown in trust that we are confronted with may be 
surprising, but it isn’t new. 
In the early 90s, I was an anti-corporate 
campaigner, standing outside the Shell 
headquarters in London, helping to draw 
the world’s attention to the company’s 
treatment of people, and in particular of 
local activists, in Nigeria. 
At the same time, Nike was being 
challenged by activists around the 
conditions of workers producing their 
sneakers in Vietnam. These revelations 
soon reached – and impacted – many 
other global brands. A year later, 
the mining sector was confronted by 
significant mainstream press and other 
stakeholders accusing it of poor social 
and environmental performance which 
led to loss of social licence. For the 
miners this was serious as the community 
can literally shut down your operations.
Fast-forward to today, gaining and 
maintaining a social licence for mining 
and infrastructure projects remains 
a major challenge as more recent 
examples demonstrate; from the 
Keystone Pipeline in the US to the daily 
tribulations of Adani’s Carmichael coal 
mine closer to home. 
The rapidly growing number of 
professionals working in this social 
licence space and on the social 
performance of organisations continues 
to grow. For example, there are 
thousands of ‘social auditors’ carrying 
out social compliance audits for leading 
retailers and brands as part of these 
companies’ ethical sourcing programmes 
that are aiming to drive respect for 
human rights in global supply chains. 
The Australian public’s growing 
expectations are reflected in a proposed 
introduction of Modern Slavery 
legislation that will require our largest 
corporations to report on their efforts to 
address the risks of modern slavery in 
their supply chains and operations.
The erosion of trust that an individual 
or small group of organisations 
catalyses can through contagion affect 
entire industries and ‘institutions’ 
more broadly . The Royal Commission 
into Misconduct in the Banking, 
Superannuation and Financial Services 
Industry is one example where high 
profile breaches of trust have led to a 
public examination of practices across 
an entire industry . In recent weeks, 
Oxfam International’s headline grabbing 
issues have raised questions about 
the development sector in general. 
Contemporary businesses offer jobs, 
goods and services never before seen in 
human history, yet people increasingly 
distrust the companies that provide 
Introduction: 
Trust in business